---
{
  "name": "Binding: Delegate vs Trigger",
  "culture": "en-US",
  "description": "When to use delegate and when to use trigger.",
  "engines" : { "aurelia-doc" : "^1.0.0" },
  "author": {
    "name": "Jeremy Danyow",
  	"url": "http://danyow.net"
  },
  "contributors": [],
  "translators": [],
  "keywords": ["JavaScript", "Data Binding"]
}
---

## [Delegate vs Trigger](aurelia-doc://section/1/version/1.0.0)

A couple frequently asked questions are:

* *What's the difference between delegate and trigger?*
* *When should I use delegate and when should I use trigger?*

The short answer is: **Use `delegate` except when you cannot use `delegate`.**

Event delegation is a technique used to improve application performance. It drastically reduces the number of event subscriptions by leveraging the "bubbling" characteristic of most DOM events. With event delegation, handlers are not attached to individual elements. Instead, a single event handler is attached to a top-level node such as the body element. When an event bubbles up to this shared top-level handler the event delegation logic calls the appropriate handler based on the event's [target](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Event/target).

To find out if [event delegation](https://davidwalsh.name/event-delegate) can be used with a particular event, google *`mdn [event name] event`*. In fact, preceding any web platform related google search with `mdn` often returns a high quality result from the Mozilla Developer Network. Once you're on the event's MDN page, check whether the event `bubbles`. Only events that bubble can be used with Aurelia's `delegate` binding command. **The `blur`, `focus`, `load` and `unload` events do not bubble so you'll need to use the `trigger` binding command to subscribe to these events.**

Here's the [MDN page for blur](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events/blur). It has further info on event delegation techniques for the blur and focus events.

### Exceptions to the general guidance above:

#### Use `trigger` on buttons when the following conditions are met:
1. You need to disable the button.
2. The button's content is made up of other elements (as opposed to just text).

This will ensure clicks on disabled button's children won't bubble up to the delegate event handler.  More info [here](https://github.com/aurelia/binding/issues/163).

#### Use `trigger` for `click` in certain iOS use-cases:
iOS does not bubble click events on elements other than `a`, `button`, `input` and `select`. If you're subscribing to `click` on a non-input element like a `div` and are targeting iOS, use the `trigger` binding command.
More info [here](http://www.quirksmode.org/blog/archives/2010/09/click_event_del.html) and [here](https://github.com/aurelia/binding/issues/263).

## [Event delegation with `Capture`](aurelia-doc://section/2/version/1.0.0)

In most situations, `delegate` and `trigger` are enough for you to handle user interaction. However, `delegate` and `trigger` can be sometime too late to react to an event. Some other times, events may never reach to your `delegate` or `trigger` handlers, this is the case when you interact with content (elements) generated by 3rd party plugins.

`delegate` and `trigger` will fail in the following example:

<code-listing heading="Capture command example">
  <source-code lang="HTML">
    <div class='my-plugin-container' click.delegate='onClickPluginContainer()'>
      <!--
        Content inside here is generated by a plugin
        That will call `event.stopPropagation()` on any click events
      -->
    </div>
  </source-code>
</code-listing>

This is where you may need another way to listen to `click` event, via binding command `capture`:

<code-listing heading="Capture command example">
  <source-code lang="HTML">
    <div class='my-plugin-container' click.capture='onClickPluginContainer()'>
      <!--
        Content inside here is generated by a plugin
        That will call `event.stopPropagation()` on any click events
      -->
    </div>
  </source-code>
</code-listing>

In the 2nd example, `onClickPluginContainer()` is guaranteed to happen no matter `event.stopPropagation()` is called or not inside the container.

With the introduction of `capture` binding command, you may ask "Which is best command for event handling ?".

Well, the short answer above remains true, **Use `delegate` except when you cannot use `delegate`.** `capture` is not needed normally and may even be confusing as it's not how we normally works with browser events.